[]{#anchor}G_String_VI

User Manual

by Ralph F. Bloch

&

Geoff Norman

McMaster University

Hamilton, September 2021

© 2021 by Ralph Bloch & Geoff Norman, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada

-   []{#anchor-1}[]{#anchor-2}Introduction
    ======================================

G_String_VI is a software program with a graphical user interface to
code data entry and compute generalizability coefficients based on
variance component estimates generated by urGENOVA. It can also create
synthetic data sets based on user-provided designs and variance
coefficients. It was designed and coded by Ralph Bloch in cooperation
with Geoff Norman as part of a project originally commissioned by the
Medical Council of Canada and subsequently developed further.

G_String_VI is written in Java 8 on the Linux platform. It can run on
Macintosh or PC computers under Windows, Linux or iOS operating systems.

urGENOVA was written by R.L. Brennan at the University of Iowa. It is
included in the installation package for G_String_VI, and operates in
the background. It is a traditional command line program written in ANSI
C; users needed to specify their parameters by means of a somewhat
cryptic control file, since urGENOVA does not have a graphical user
interface. Also, urGENOVA has difficulties with current long directory
and file names. G_String takes care of that. While urGenova provides the
variance components for the individual effects, it does not calculate
variance coefficients under different conditions; G_String does that as
well.

-   []{#anchor-3}[]{#anchor-4}Background
    ====================================

-   Generalizability Theory is complex, and readers interested in a
    deeper understanding should consult the resources listed in the
    Bibliography. We will here only explain some essential terms
    superficially. For novices in G theory the YouTube video
    <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uLMrHCTP65Q> provides a good eye
    opener, and the AMEE Guide No. 68 may be particularly helpful.

-   The purpose of a generalizability study is to estimate the
    reliability of a specific behavioral measurement with the intent of
    generalizing its findings, and to identify potential sources of
    measurement error.

-   Behavioral measurements require defined methods to elicit and
    collect responses from subjects of interest to a set of stimuli such
    as statements on a questionnaire, observations of performance, or
    almost any psychometric measurement. The responses will typically
    vary widely, depending on the individual subject, as well as other
    factors such as the rater, the specific question, or other sources
    of error. G theory is a statistical strategy to identify and
    quantify these various sources of error.

-   The variability can be expressed mathematically as a variance, which
    generalizability analysis subdivides into a variance component
    attributable to the subjects and variance components associated with
    various errors associated with the measurement process.

-   The variance component attributed to the subjects is designated
    $$\sigma^{2}\left( \tau \right)$$, while the variance component
    resulting from all the other aspects of the measurement is referred
    to as $$\sigma^{2}\left( \delta \right)$$or
    $$\sigma^{2}\left( \Delta \right)$$respectively. The δ-component is
    called relative or norm referenced, the Δ-component is called
    absolute or criteria referenced.

-   The ratio between the subject variance component and the relative
    total variance is called the 'generalizability coefficient', while
    the ratio between the subject variance component and the absolute
    total variance is called the 'index of dependability':

-   $$E{\rho^{2} = \frac{\sigma^{2}\left( \tau \right)}{\sigma^{2}{\left( \tau \right) + \sigma^{2}}\left( \delta \right)}}$$
    Generalizability Coefficient

-   $$\Phi = \frac{\sigma^{2}\left( \tau \right)}{\sigma^{2}{\left( \tau \right) + \sigma^{2}}\left( \Delta \right)}$$
    Index of Dependability

-   The individual aspects of the measurement design are customarily
    referred to as 'facets'. The facet corresponding to the subjects
    under investigation is referred to as 'facet of differentiation',
    the other aspects are called 'facets of generalization'. If the
    facet of differentiation is nested in some other facet (for example,
    students within classrooms) the nesting facet (classroom) is called
    a 'facet of stratification'.

-   $$\sigma^{2}\left( \tau \right)$$,
    $$\sigma^{2}\left( \delta \right)$$,
    $$\sigma^{2}\left( \Delta \right)$$, $$E\rho^{2}$$, and Φ are
    calculated by G_String_VI from the variance components corresponding
    to the various facets and their appropriate combinations, provided
    automatically by Brennan's urGenova contained in G_String_VI. The
    actual calculations are detailed in the printout.

-   G theory is based on the linear regression model of statistics. The
    analysis solves for the parameter variances in a data set collected
    under a specific experimental design.

-   G_String_VI also allows the researcher to construct synthetic data
    sets that would result from a specified design, assuming postulated
    variances. Being able to create synthetic data sets is not only
    useful in teaching G Analysis, it also allows for experimentation,
    thus promoting a deeper understanding of G Theory.

-   Users should be warned not to misrepresent synthetic data sets as
    empirical data. G_String_VI synthetic data sets carry a
    pseudo-random signature that allows detection of their synthetic
    nature by statistical methods.

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   []{#anchor-5}[]{#anchor-6}Download and Installation
    ===================================================

G_String_VI and its manual are available for download from McMaster
University at:

[h](https://healthsci.mcmaster.ca/merit/research/g_string_vi)[ttps://healthsci.mcmaster.ca/merit/research/g_string_vi](https://healthsci.mcmaster.ca/merit/research/g_string_vi)

Before the program can be used, it needs to be properly installed
depending on the operating system of the machine it has to run on.
Detailed instructions are available on the web site.

[]{#anchor-7}Author's Reflections
=================================

G_String started about 10 years ago as a humble data entry tool for
urGenova. Over the years it has gradually become more stable and
capable, largely due to helpful feedback from the user community. It
also required frequent adaptations to changes in operating systems and
unusual behaviors of the same operating system in different locales.

There is no reason to assume that this need is likely to change over the
next years. But the author's age makes it unlikely that he will be
around for very much longer.

Unless some users unite to take initiative and accept the baton,
G_String will gradually fizzle -- which seems a pity.

I am willing to assist the take over by fleshing out the source code
documentation, and supporting whoever will take on the stewardship. It
needs a group of enthusiasts willing to collaborate, and should include
statistical, programming and management skills -- not necessarily all
within one person.

If you are interested, please write to me at
[**ralph\@papaworx.com**](mailto:ralph@papaworx.com).

[]{#anchor-8}[]{#anchor-9}Illustrative Example
==============================================

In the following we run G_String_VI through an actual study, courtesy of
Bao Quoc Le MD. MSc. from The Center for Advanced Training in Clinical
Simulation (ATCS), University of Medicine and Pharmacy at Ho Chi Minh
City, Vietnam.

A class of 99 medical students was divided into 12 groups. Six groups
each were tested over two days. On each day 2 instructors rated the
students of three groups each. Each student had to complete 40 items,
each rated on a pass/fail scale.

This example illustrates many important features of G_String_VI.

-   []{#anchor-10}[]{#anchor-11}User Interface: Analysis
    ====================================================

![](Pictures/1000020100000384000003383273BF59A0ED3AA6.png){width="3in"
height="2.7465in"}The basic user interface of G_String_VI stays constant
during use.

Use the menu bar at the top of the G_String application window to select
the desired operation.

All information relevant to the actual operations are shown in the
central panel. Throughout G analysis or data synthesis the user is
guided step by step. Context-specific help is available via the Help
option on the menu bar.

The bottom bar enables users to step through the operation.

![](Pictures/1000020100000384000003381F6377830FBDADDA.png){width="3.0728in"
height="2.8193in"}

Besides providing access to context specific help, the Help menu also
leads to background information, the manual for urGenova, as well as
some administrative data relating to G_String_VI and urGENOVA.\

-   ![](Pictures/10000201000003840000033809D8105436609582.png){width="3in"
    height="2.7465in"}There are two ways to start a G Analysis. Usually
    one chooses the 'Start new' from the 'Action' menu option. In this
    case all data and control language has to be entered by the user.
    The control language is entered in response to queries from
    G_String. Data are typically entered from a spreadsheet. If,
    however, users have a project in progress, they can select 'Use
    Existing'. Thus users can select an existing control file, and step
    through already completed forms, changing and adding information as
    required.

![](Pictures/1000020100000384000003383A26531FDCAC45C7.png){width="3in"
height="2.7465in"}

**Step 1**, one enters a suitable title for the project as an aid in
identifying the data later. For illustration purposes we are using
actual data provided by Dr. Bao Quoc Le with his kind permission.

![](Pictures/100002010000038400000338442E7AD7EE632A03.png){width="3in"
height="2.7465in"}

**Step 2** allows the addition of descriptive text, which contributes
context information to assist the interpretation of results.

Note: None of the lines in this descriptive text field may begin with
one of the reserved keywords: GSTUDY, COMMENT, OPTIONS, EFFECT, FORMAT,
ANCHORS, or VARIANCES.

![](Pictures/100002010000038400000338F9A28B89678476F2.png){width="3in"
height="2.7465in"}

In **step 3** the designation for the facet of differentiation -
'student' - has to be entered, together with a unique, identifying lower
case label -- 's'.

A toggle identifies whether the subject appears crossed or nested in the
particular design.

And finally, the number spinner allows the user to select how many
facets of generalization are involved.

![](Pictures/10000201000003840000033832FBA7138404B20D.png){width="3in"
height="2.7465in"}

In **step 4**, the facets of generalization are entered next, including
their designation, a label and whether they are crossed or nested.

![](Pictures/100002010000038400000338E0931562F8567F56.png){width="3in"
height="2.7465in"}

In **step 5** the facets have to be arranged in the same order as they
appear in the data file.

In this case, since 'Student' is nested in 'Group', the letter 's' must
be grabbed and moved down to 'g'. The asterisk indicating 'change of
line' stays with 's'; otherwise one needs to click on the label where
the line changes.

![](Pictures/1000020100000384000003382CEBC5DA7FDFF822.png){width="3in"
height="2.7465in"}

Now that the order of facets is correct, corresponding to the order of
the data file, and each student's scores appear on a separate line.

![](Pictures/100002010000038400000338C9BDA3B783B1AFDD.png){width="3in"
height="2.7465in"}

**Step 6** establishes correct nesting by grabbing the corresponding
label on the left, and dragging it over to the right, dropping it on the
facet it is nested in.

This process has to be repeated until the desired nesting order has been
set.

![](Pictures/100002010000038400000338FB1F193A2D349ED1.png){width="3in"
height="2.7465in"}

Once, no more orphan nested facets are left on the left, one can proceed
to the next step.

![](Pictures/10000201000003D90000034E913F7A6F53488922.png){width="3.2299in"
height="2.7799in"}

**Step 7** opens the actual data file. The correct formatting of the
data file is described in section 'Data File Format'.

![](Pictures/100002010000038400000338A36E18F03CAA18BF.png){width="3in"
height="2.7465in"}

In this case the first four fields on each line indicate the order index
for each facet. They are not used explicitly for the urGenova
calculations, therefore we set the spinner to skip the first four
fields. Field width can be left at '8'.

![](Pictures/100002010000038400000338D142F50B03776783.png){width="3in"
height="2.7465in"}

Now that the relevant data have been selected, one can proceed to the
next step.

![](Pictures/1000020100000384000003383497FB2FE88B18AB.png){width="3in"
height="2.7465in"}

In **step 8** one specifies sample size for all five facets, one after
the other.

In this example, the study extends over two days ('d').

![](Pictures/1000020100000384000003381FA0135A8BB85562.png){width="3in"
height="2.7465in"}

For each of the two days there are two raters ('r').

![](Pictures/1000020100000384000003389B1A8F69047493B2.png){width="3in"
height="2.7465in"}

Each rater sees three groups of students ('g') on his day.

![](Pictures/100002010000038400000338940E6C63CA83B846.png){width="3in"
height="2.7465in"}

But not every group contains the same number of students. If we add them
all up, there are 99 students ('s').

![](Pictures/10000201000003840000033830E46CA2050E05C0.png){width="3in"
height="2.7465in"}

Every student, finally, has to complete all 40 items ('i') in the
assigned time. 'Items' is crossed with the rest.

![](Pictures/1000020100000384000003386ACF6E094CCCD607.png){width="3in"
height="2.7465in"}

Now we have the option of saving the completed Analysis Control file, to
be reused or modified at a later stage. This can save a lot of time in
the future.

![](Pictures/10000201000003D90000034E3492B0237D37D166.png){width="3.2835in"
height="2.8193in"}

Just give it a suitable file name, and place it in the directory of
choice.

![](Pictures/10000201000003840000033874104C5B73E06471.png){width="3in"
height="2.7465in"}

In **step 9 **we are ready to interpret the results.

The screen confirms that urGenova could successfully process the data
entered. The scrollable window shows the standard urGenova output.

It repeats the control input data and shows calculated mean values.

![](Pictures/100002010000038400000338652B5BD82D8C348E.png){width="3in"
height="2.7465in"}

As we scroll down further the output shows a table of the calculated
variance components. From here on G_String_VI takes over again to
calculate the generalizability coefficients.

![](Pictures/100002010000038400000338A3C4EEC2CA55894F.png){width="3in"
height="2.7465in"}

Finally **step 10:** urGenova arrives at the variance components by
statistical estimations. Some of the components can come out negative,
which is formally nonsensical for squared quantities. The convention is
to set these components to zero for further calculations. The
'Consistency' measure indicates the relative sum of all positive
components. If 'Consistency' falls significantly below 1.0, results
should be taken with caution.

The calculations of the generalizability coefficients are detailed in
the output. Test results can be considered reliable, if $$E\rho^{2}$$
reaches at least 0.8. For high impact exams, a threshold value of 0.9 is
desirable.

![](Pictures/100002010000038400000338FA563F22E9AE1ED3.png){width="3in"
height="2.7465in"}

To the right of the scrolling window is a calculator for D-Studies.
Let's see what happens, if we double the number of items to 80: the
generalizability coefficient rises from 0.64 to 0.78.

Finally it is wise to save the results of the analysis in a text file
(File → Save Results).

-   []{#anchor-12}[]{#anchor-13}User Interface: Synthetic Data Sets
    ===============================================================

New in Version G_String_VI is the ability to construct synthetic data
sets based on individual research designs with realistic variance
components, using a similar graphical user interface as that provided
for the Analysis.

Such synthetic data sets can be fed directly to Analysis. They provide
at least two benefits:

1.  Instructors can painlessly construct data sets for students to
    practice G analysis skills.
2.  Researchers can try out various research architectures, based on
    identical subject variances and experimental designs in order to
    optimize reliability of their potential findings.

![](Pictures/10000201000003840000033821C1CAEC8FE10FD6.png){width="3in"
height="2.7465in"}

Choose Action → 'Synthesize Data' in the top menu bar to start the
process. In analogy to Analysis, Synthesis can also be invoked based on
a previously constructed script by selecting 'Synthesize Again'.

![](Pictures/100002010000038400000338E81088C79585E2E4.png){width="3in"
height="2.7465in"}

As in Analysis, the user starts by entering a short verbal description
on purpose, context, and design.

This can often help later in clarifying some issues.

-   ![](Pictures/10000201000003840000033859FD8A4CB82A166E.png){width="3in"
    height="2.7465in"}

The next four steps are identical to the ones in Analysis, and therefore
will not be described here.

![](Pictures/1000020100000384000003383497FB2FE88B18AB.png){width="3in"
height="2.7465in"}

Since the purpose of 'Synthesis' is to generate a data set file, the
next step requires us to specify sample sizes for all facets identically
to the Analysis. We will skip here the steps after 'Day' in our chosen
example.

![](Pictures/1000020100000384000003383DA9C318FADA97B6.png){width="3in"
height="2.7465in"}

After we have finished specifying all the sample sizes, we have to
specify the desired score range in integers from the minimum (floor) to
maximum value (ceiling), and the expected mean value as decimal value in
between.

In this example we simply expand the score scale from the Analysis by a
factor 10.

-   ![](Pictures/100002010000038400000338D348A37BD8BB1EED.png){width="3in"
    height="2.7465in"}

This is probably the most complex entry form. From the design data you
have entered, G_String_VI has determined all possible facet combinations
and interactions.

In this example there are nine variance components to be specified.
Since variances are quadratic forms, we have to multiply the original
variance components from the results of Analysis by a factor 100.

![](Pictures/10000201000003840000033800EA18F24C12C032.png){width="3in"
height="2.7465in"}

-   
-   You now have the option of saving the Synthesis control file for
    reuse in various 'what if" experiments. You will also have to save
    the newly generated, synthetic data set.
-   Don't forget to save the synthetic data.

![](Pictures/100002010000038400000338FABB9F62F706FF7D.png){width="3in"
height="2.7465in"}

Next G_String_VI informs you how the Synthesis went. Remember that this
is a Monte-Carlo type operation. The Normal Distribution goes from -∞ to
+∞, so some results will be outside the allowed range and have to be
constrained. As a consequence the resulting variance components will be
somewhat smaller than the input values.

Don't forget to save the synthetic data.

-   []{#anchor-14}[]{#anchor-15}Empirical vs Synthetic Data Set
    ===========================================================

-   Let us now compare the results from analyzing the original,
    empirical binary data set with those of the synthetic, expanded
    score range data set:

  ------------------------------- ----------- ---------------------
  Parameter                       empirical   synthetic, expanded
  Score, floor                    0           0
  Score, ceiling                  1           10
  Score, mean                     0.694       6.37
                                              
  Variance Components:                        
  d                               -0.00027    -0.04190
  r:d                             -0.00081    0.05636
  g:r:d                           0.00112     -0.00393
  s:g:r:d                         0.00463     0.27099
  i                               0.07563     3.52117
  di                              0.00698     0.80609
  ri:d                            0.00894     0.30097
  gi:r:d                          0.01480     0.64473
  si:g:r:d                        0.10332     6.30737
                                              
  σ²(τ)                           0.0046      0.2710
  σ²(δ)                           0.0026      0.1577
  σ²(δ)                           0.0064      0.3459
                                              
  Generalizability Coefficients               
  Consistency                     0.91        0.93
  Eρ²                             0.64        0.63
  Φ                               0.42        0.44
  ------------------------------- ----------- ---------------------

Remember that, while only 12 (3 + 9) fixed parameters were specified for
the synthesis, G_String_VI contributed 4837 random values to generate
the synthetic data set. It is, therefore, not surprising that
intermediate results of the synthesis diverge significantly from those
of the original, empirical values. But the final generalizability
coefficients agree surprisingly well, considering that we have even
expanded the scoring range.

-   []{#anchor-16}[]{#anchor-17}Data File Format
    ============================================

-   G_String_VI accepts data in comma (csv), or tab (tsv) separated
    format. Scores have to be integer values. Leading index columns are
    permitted, but have to be screened out in step 6. No leading title
    or column header lines are permitted.

-   The best way to prepare data set files is in a spreadsheet, and then
    export the properly formatted data in either .csv or .tsv format.

-   []{#anchor-18}[]{#anchor-19}Auxiliaries
    =======================================

-   From anywhere in the program one can start over by selecting **File
    → Start Over**.

-   From anywhere in the program one can exit by selecting **File →
    Exit**.

-   To change Diagnostic Log levels select **Setup → Log Level**.

-   The graphical appearance and functionality is largely controlled by
    a set of preference parameters. These can be viewed, changed, saved
    to an external file, or imported from an external file by selecting
    **Setup → Preferences**. Casual users are advised to leave the
    preferences unchanged. Users who want to experiment with preferences
    should first save the original state in an external file, so they
    can always restore G_String_VI to its default configuration..

-   While stepping through Analysis or Synthesis users are supported by
    context-specific help screens callable by selecting **Help →**
    **Contextual Help**.

-   Although contained in the manual, background information is
    available by selecting **Help → Background**.

-   Users who wish the full functionality of urGenova can select **Help
    → urGenova Manual**, and change preference options accordingly.

-   To find the version and build date of G_String_VI select **Help →
    About G_String_VI**.

-   To inspect the copyright constraints Robert Brennan has stipulated,
    select **Help → About urGenova**.

[]{#anchor-20}[]{#anchor-21}Troubleshooting
===========================================

1.  If new users fail to properly install G_String_VI according to their
    specific operating system, and perform **Setup**, as explained on
    the download site, the program will not start. Make sure that you
    followed the installation instructions exactly.

2.  Clicking Setup → **Preferences → Change Preferences** should show a
    named directory in the 'Working Directory' window. The actual
    directory
    ![](Pictures/10000000000001490000005BBF4A9EBD48061A52.png){width="3.0898in"
    height="0.8535in"}must contain the program 'urGenova'
    ('urGe![](Pictures/10000000000001750000009E0F23AD459BB9E739.png){width="2.3307in"
    height="0.9866in"}nova.exe' for Windows).

3.  If it all fails, send a detailed email to
    [**ralph\@papaworx.com**](mailto:ralph@papaworx.com).

Additional resources and tutorials are available at:

**https://papaworx.com/G-School**

-   []{#anchor-22}[]{#anchor-23}Limitations
    =======================================

-   G_String_VI has no limitation in number of permitted crossed facets
    or sample size. Nesting has been tested up to level 5 deep, but we
    are not aware of structural limitations beyond.

-   []{#anchor-24}[]{#anchor-25}Bibliography
    ========================================

-   Brennan, R.L. Generalizability Theory. New York, Springer, 2003.
    (*The "bible" of G theory. This manual contains a number of
    references to Brennan*).

-   Cronbach, L.J., Gleser, G.C., Nanda, H., & Rajaratnam, N. (1972).
    The dependability of behavioral measurements: Theory of
    generalizability for scores and profiles. New York: John Wiley.

-   Shavelson, P., Webb, N. Generalizability Theory: A Primer. Thousand
    Oaks CA, SAGE, 1991.

-   Streiner, D.L., Norman, G.R. Health Measurement Scales: A practical
    Guide to their Development and Use. (4^th^ ed.) Oxford, OUP, 2008.

-   Bloch R., Norman G. Generalizability theory for the perplexed: a
    practical introduction and guide: AMEE Guide No. 68. Med Teach.
    2012;34(11):960-92

-   Wikipedia: Generalizability Theory.

-   Bloch R. G-Theory, an Introduction. YouTube:
    <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uLMrHCTP65Q>

-   

-   
-   
