[Return](professionals.md)

## Signature ##
The usual way of dealing with complex categorisation tasks, such as applying Brennan's rules, is the [Turing](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alan_Turing) method of converting them into a complex system of 'if' . . 'then' binary decisions. But [Noam Chomsky](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Noam_Chomsky) offers an attractive alternative 'Syntactic Transforms'. This greatly simplifies the implementation of Brennan's rules.

One of the char attributes of 'Facet' is [facetType](../workbench/GS_L/src/model/Facet.java#L16). Originally, it has the value of 'x', i.e. undifferentiated. In step 7 of 'Synthesis' the method [Nest.G_setFacets()](../workbench/GS_L/src/model/Nest.java#L466) is called. Depending on the facet's role in Analysis, it gets the attribute 'd' (Differentiation), if it represents the subject of the investigation, 's' (Stratification) if it categorizes the subject, and 'g' (Generalization) if it describes part of the measuring process. This holds for the so called 'G-Study' of the analysis. Later on, when in 'D-Study' mode, the facet type can also be set to 'f' for otherwise 'g' type facets that are considered 'Fixed'.

As 'Effects' are analyzed in 'VarianceComponent', the descriptive pattern is [extracted](../workbench/GS_L/src/utilities/VarianceComponent.java#L49) as the first word in the corresponding line generated by 'urGENOVA', and [converted to a signature](../workbench/GS_L/src/utilities/VarianceComponent.java#L140), where each facet designation char is replaced by its facet type char.

This makes the application of Brennan's rules trivial.
